doc: matter: expand creating accessory guide (#7009)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_matter_creating_accessory.rst

   :local:
   :depth: 2

> As part of this guide, you will modify the :ref:`Matter template <matter_template_sample>` sample to create a Matter accessory device that measures temperature and can be turned on and off.

Reviewer: I think in the glossary we already use the term "Matter device" instead of "Matter accessory device" since Matter community avoids using the "accessory" term. Maybe we can start using "Matter device" here, too?

Author: Edited

> You will create a sensor application that uses a temperature sensor with an on/off switch, with the sensor periodically fetching the simulated temperature sensor value and updating the corresponding cluster attributes.

Author: Rephrased

This sensor application will form a Matter accessory device within a Matter network.

.. note::
   Make sure you are familiar with Matter in the |NCS| and you have tested some of the available :ref:`matter_samples` before you work with this user guide.

Overview
********

The Matter accessory device is a basic node of the `Matter`_ network.
The accessory is formed by the development kit and the application that is running the Matter stack, which is programmed on the development kit.

> Each Matter application must provide the following layers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Matter application consists of the following layers:
```

> * Integration layer that provides the Matter core components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Matter stack that provides the Matter core components.
```

* Data model layer in the form of clusters, which contains commands and attributes that are to be accessible over the Matter network.
  This layer can be further broken down into the following groups:

>   * Utility clusters - required by the Matter network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Utility clusters - that represent management and diagnostic features of a Matter node. These clusters are common for all Matter nodes.
```

>   * Application clusters - specific to a given application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Application clusters - that represent functionalities specific to a given application.
```

* Application logic, such as turning on and off a light bulb in response to certain commands.

Creating a Matter accessory device consists of adding new application clusters to the Matter template sample.
By default, the template sample includes only mandatory Matter clusters, necessary to commission the accessory into a Matter network.

.. figure:: images/matter_template_sample.svg
   :alt: Creating Matter accessory device

   Creating Matter accessory device

Cluster is a data model building block in Matter.
It is a representation of a single functionality within a Matter accessory, such as turning a device on and off.
Each cluster contains attributes, commands, and events, which can be mandatory or optional.
Attributes are stored in the device's memory, while commands can be used to modify or read the state of the device, including the cluster attributes.

> Clusters appropriate for a single device type such as a sensor or a light bulb are organized into an addressable container that is called an *endpoint*.

Reviewer: The requirement that each endpoint must have a single device type is now obsolete/relaxed. We can only say that:
* clusters can be organized into containers called endpoints
* most utility clusters are required to be on endpoint 0
* application clusters are usually put on endpoints with IDs ``1`` and higher.

Adding the functionalities for an on/off switch and a sensor requires adding new clusters.

Adding new application clusters can be achieved by modifying ZAP file, which can be found as :file:`src/template.zap`.
This is a JSON file that contains the data model configuration of clusters, commands, and attributes that are enabled for a given application.
It is not used directly by Matter applications, but it is used to generate the source files for handling given clusters.

The ZAP file can be edited using `ZCL Advanced Platform`_ (ZAP tool), a third-party tool that is a generic templating engine for applications and libraries based on Zigbee Cluster Library.
This tool is provided with the Matter submodule.

To edit clusters using the ZAP tool, complete the following steps:

1. Open your installation directory for the |NCS| in a command line.
#. Navigate to :file:`modules/lib/matter`.
#. Open the :file:`src/template.zap` for editing by running the following command, where ``samples/matter/sensor`` stands for the path where you copied the template sample in the first step of this guide.

   .. code-block::

>       ./scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh samples/matter/sensor/src/template.zap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      ./scripts/tools/zap/run_zaptool.sh ../../../nrf/samples/matter/sensor/src/template.zap
```

      Zigbee Cluster Configurator window in ZAP tool

   By default, the window displays all available clusters.
   These can be filtered to show :guilabel:`Only Enabled` clusters.
   At this stage, only one endpoint is available (Endpoint 0).
#. In the ZAP tool, click :guilabel:`ADD NEW ENDPOINT`.
#. In the :guilabel:`Create New Endpoint` menu, create a new endpoint that represents the temperature sensor device type:

   .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_create_new_endpoint.png
      :alt: Create New Endpoint menu in ZAP tool

      Create New Endpoint menu in ZAP tool

   The new cluster is created with both the Basic and Identify clusters enabled.

> #. Disable the Basic and Identify clusters by changing their option to ``Not Enabled`` in the drop-down menu in the :guilabel:`Options` column.

Reviewer: Actually, let's drop this step. Leaving unused clusters enabled shouldn't be harmful and in fact, they are required by the device type specification.

      Zigbee Cluster Configurator window in ZAP tool

   By default, the window displays all available clusters.
   These can be filtered to show :guilabel:`Only Enabled` clusters.
   At this stage, only one endpoint is available (Endpoint 0).
#. In the ZAP tool, click :guilabel:`ADD NEW ENDPOINT`.
#. In the :guilabel:`Create New Endpoint` menu, create a new endpoint that represents the temperature sensor device type:

   .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_create_new_endpoint.png
      :alt: Create New Endpoint menu in ZAP tool

      Create New Endpoint menu in ZAP tool

   The new cluster is created with both the Basic and Identify clusters enabled.

> #. Disable the Basic and Identify clusters by changing their option to ``---`` in the drop-down menu in the :guilabel:`Options` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Disable the Basic and Identify clusters by changing their option to ``Not Enabled`` in the drop-down menu in the :guilabel:`Options` column.
```
The option has changed.

   #. In the :guilabel:`COMMANDS` tab, make sure that you have both On and Off commands enabled:

   .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_enable_onoff_commands.png
      :alt: On/off cluster configuration

      On/off cluster configuration

#. Configure the Temperature Measurement cluster required for this endpoint:

   a. Expand the :guilabel:`Measurement & Sensing` menu and configure the Temperature Measurement cluster by setting the :guilabel:`Server` option from the drop-down menu.

      .. figure:: images/matter_create_accessory_add_temperature_measurement.png
         :alt: Configuring the Temperature Measurement server cluster

         Configuring the Temperature Measurement server cluster

   #. Go to the Temperature Measurement cluster configuration and make sure that you have the ``MeasuredValue`` attribute enabled.

#. Save the file and exit.
#. Use the modified ZAP file to generate the C++ code that contains the selected clusters by running the following command, where ``samples/matter/sensor`` stands for the path where you copied the template sample in the first step of this guide:

   .. code-block::

>       ./scripts/tools/zap/generate.py ../../../../samples/matter/sensor/src/template.zap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      ./scripts/tools/zap/generate.py ../../../nrf/samples/matter/sensor/src/template.zap
```

           return 0;
   }

The timer must be initialized in the ``Init()`` method of the ``AppTask`` class.

> If :c:func:`StartSensorTimer()` is called, which points to the ``SensorTimer`` object, the :c:struct:`SensorMeasure` event is added to the event queue every *aTimeoutMs* milliseconds, until :c:func:`StopSensorTimer()` is called.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what `which points to the SensorTimer object` means here. Did I say sth like that in the recording? :)

           GetAppTask().PostEvent(AppEvent(*value ? AppEvent::SensorActivate : AppEvent::SensorDeactivate));
   }

In this implementation, the ``if`` part filters out events other than those that belong to the On/Off cluster.

> Then, the callback posts the event for the sensor, namely ``SensorActivate`` if the current value of the attribute is not a zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, the callback posts the event for the sensor, namely ``SensorActivate`` if the current value of the attribute is non-zero.
```
I'm not an expert, but "a zero" seems grammatically incorrect since there's only one zero in the world :D
